United Group is an alternative telecom provider in the former Yugoslavia that operates in two main business segments: telecommunication platforms and media (content and advertising).
United Group began in 2000 as a small cable company and expanded over the years through the acquisition and the formation of a number of assets, such as SBB, Telemach Slovenia and Telemach Bosnia and Herzegovina.[1] All companies formed together in 2012 to officially become United Group. Telemach Montenegro became a part of United Group as well in 2014. Telemach acquired Tušmobil on 1 April 2015.[2] This being a cable acquisition of mobile network makes it a unique case in the region, and the first step of United Group into providing all telecommunication services (fixed, mobile, television, and internet) in one household.[3]
Today, United Group is the largest alternative Pay TV platform in the region of former Yugoslavia, providing television, Internet, fixed and mobile telephony to a large number of households and offices in the region through its cable, DTH and OTT platforms.[4][5]
In 2013, the group started its worldwide OTT platform, NetTV Plus, through which it provides Pay TV and fixed telephony services to the former Yugoslav diaspora. As the group’s distribution platforms developed extensively throughout the region, the next step was entering the content and advertising sales business, today represented by United Media. In March 2014, United Group was bought by Kohlberg Kravis Roberts, a leading global investment firm with headquarters in New York, and U.S. 94.3 billion in assets under management.[6][7] The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) is a co-investor in the company.[8]
In September 2018, a British private equity firm BC Partners began the process of acquisition of the majority stakes of United Group from KKR for an enterprise valuation of 2.6 billion euros.[9][10] The acquisition was finalized on 4 March 2019.[11]
On 24 December 2020, United Group announced they would buy Bulgaria's Nova Broadcasting Group;[12] the acquisition was completed on 22 January 2021.
The company was the first to offer digital fixed telephony services in 2012.[14] This was also the year United Group launched the first application for watching television and using TV services on different mobile devices.
In 2016, United Group established United Cloud, an in-house technology and software "innovation center".
In September 2017, EON TV platform was launched, which allows viewers in Serbia to watch TV via a smart TV app.[15] In 2018, United Group launched EON Smart Box, which was the first regional solution to combine television with Android services and applications.
In 2018, United Group also partnered with Fon to expand its WiFi network and enable Balkan customers the access to more than 68 million WiFi hotspots all over the world.
