Assassin's Creed is an open-world action-adventure stealth video game franchise published by Ubisoft and developed mainly by its studio Ubisoft Montreal using the game engine Anvil and its more advanced derivatives. Created by Patrice Désilets, Jade Raymond, and Corey May, the Assassin's Creed series depicts a fictional millennia-old struggle between the Assassins, who fight for peace with free will, and the Templars, who desire peace through order and control. The series features historical fiction, science fiction and fictional characters intertwined with real-world historical events and figures. For the majority of time players control an Assassin in the past history, while also playing as Desmond Miles or an Assassin Initiate in the present day, who hunt down their Templar targets. The series took inspiration from the novel Alamut by the Slovenian writer Vladimir Bartol, based on the historical Hashashin sect of the medieval Middle East,[1] while building upon concepts from the Prince of Persia series.[2]
The series's eponymous first title was released in 2007, and it has featured twelve main games in total, the most recent being 2020's Valhalla. Main games of Assassin's Creed are set in an open world and presented from the third-person perspective where the protagonists take down targets using their combat and stealth skills with the exploitation of the environment. Players have freedom to explore the historical settings as they finish main and side quests. Apart from single-player missions, some games also provide competitive and cooperative multiplayer gameplay. A new story and occasional new time period are introduced in each entry, and gameplay elements evolve from the previous one. There are three-story arcs in the series. For the first five main games, the framing story is set in 2012 and features series protagonist Desmond Miles who uses a machine called the Animus and relives the memories of his ancestors. In games up until and including Assassin's Creed Syndicate, Abstergo employees and Assassin initiates recorded genetic memories using the Helix software, helping the Templars and Assassins find new Pieces of Eden in the modern world. The latest three games, Assassin's Creed Origins, Assassin's Creed Odyssey, and Assassin's Creed Valhalla, follow ex-Abstergo employee Layla Hassan.
The main games in the Assassin's Creed video game series have received generally positive reviews for their ambition in visuals, game design, and narratives, with criticism for the yearly release cycle and frequent bugs. The spin-off games received mixed reviews. The video game series has received multiple awards and nominations, including Game of the Year awards. It is commercially successful, selling over 155 million copies as of October 2020, becoming Ubisoft's best-selling franchise and one of the highest selling video game franchises of all time. While main games are produced for major consoles and desktop platforms, multiple spin-off games are released for consoles, mobiles, and handhelds platforms. Assassin's Creed was adapted into a film, which received negative reviews. A series of art books, encyclopedias, comics, novelizations, and novels have been published. 
The Assassin's Creed series originated out of ideas for a sequel for Prince of Persia: The Sands of Time, a 3D adaption of the original Prince of Persia games, which was made for PlayStation 2, GameCube, Xbox and other platforms. It included a number of parkour moves and combat. The Sands of Time was a critical and financial success, leading publisher Ubisoft to request Ubisoft Montreal to develop a sequel, aiming for the seventh generation of video game consoles. The Ubisoft Montreal team decided on taking the gameplay from The Sands of Time into an open world approach, taking advantage of the improved processing power to render larger spaces and crowds. Narratively, the team wanted to move away from the Prince being someone next in line for the throne but to have to work for it; combined with research into secret societies led them to focus on the Assassins, based upon the historical Hashashin sect of Ismaili Shia Islam, heavily borrowing from the novel Alamut.[3]
They developed a narrative where the player would control an Assassin that served as a bodyguard for a non-playable Prince, leading them to call this game Prince of Persia: Assassin. Ubisoft was not happy with a Prince of Persia game without the Prince as the playable character, but this led to the marketing division to suggest the name Assassin's Creed, playing off the creed of the Assassins, "nothing is true; everything is permitted". Ubisoft Montreal ran with this in creating a new intellectual property, eliminating the Prince and creating the conflict between the Assassins and Templar Knights. Further, in postulating what other assassinations they could account for throughout human history, they came onto the idea of genetic memory and created the "Animus" device and modern storyline elements, which further allowed them to explain certain facets of gameplay, such as accounting when the player fails a mission, in the same way they had done in The Sands of Time.[3]
Following release of the first Assassin's Creed in 2007, Ubisoft Montreal and other Ubisoft studios use the series to present games from various historical periods, striving for historical accuracy while conceding some elements for gameplay.[3] Moving into Assassin's Creed 2 the Ubisoft Montreal team recognized that parkour was underutilized in the first game, and designed the world in the sequel to feature "freerun highways" to make it easier to enter into parkour moves, using rooftops to escape pursuits or as part of an assassin ploy. The new parkour features helped to informed the game's Renaissance Italy setting and its playable character Ezio Auditore da Firenze as a rogue-ish figure.[4] Assassin's Creed 2 also brought in more use of crowds as part of a means to hide in plain sight that the developers had seen used in Hitman: Blood Money, adding more to the concept of social stealth as a gameplay option.[4] Finally, Assassin's Creed 2 completely reworked the repetitive mission structure from the first game through numerous side activities, collectibles and other secrets. These additions became a central part of the series going forward as well as into other Ubisoft games like Watch Dogs, Far Cry and Ghost Recon.[4] The game was followed by two direct sequels based on Ezio's character.[4]
The origins for Assassin's Creed III had come both out of Ubisoft Montreal, which had planned to continue to progress the main narrative forward in time, and from an unattached project that had been developed out of Ubisoft Singapore that features naval ship combat. As the main team had settled into the American Revolution period for the game, they found this ship-to-ship combat system fit perfectly into the system, and worked setting to incorporate it further. Another major change in Assassin's Creed III was transitioning the parkour and freerun systems to work in the natural woodlands of 18th century New England, which further allowed for adding trees and other vegetation within the city areas themselves not only as part of the parkour systems but also to add to more realistic appearances, which would also continue as part of the series' ongoing design.[4]
After its release, the marketing team from Ubisoft commented that the ship combat of Assassin's Creed III was segmented off from the land-based game and felt that there could be more integration, which led to the idea of the next game Assassin's Creed IV: Black Flag based on the Golden Age of Piracy, reusing all of their past lessons on the series to date.[4] The team also used the game as a chance to address the narrative aspects of the story which had started to become stale in their eyes. They introduced Edward Kenway, initially an outsider to the Assassins/Templars conflict that becomes involved only with the prospect of wealth at the end, giving the narrative team a means to present the conflict from an outside view.[4] Further, the present-day story had moved away from a single person (Desmond Miles) to allow any observer to use the Animus to experience the generic memories from another. The narrative team set this up to have the player feel more immersed and central to the events, eventually setting up for the concept of the Initiate that would come in Assassin's Creed Unity and Assassin's Creed Syndicate.[4]
After Syndicate Ubisoft recognized that the series needed a major re-invention across both gameplay and narrative. By this point in time, available computers and consoles had enough processing power that they were able to create much larger maps, which required different mechanics from the original games. It was decided to make the next game, Assassin's Creed Origins, closer to a role-playing video game than a stealth-action game, which would also bring a game with many more hours of play than previous titles, and some long-standing features of the series were eliminated for this purpose, such as the social stealth mechanic. This changes how missions were presented - rather than directed through the Animus, the player would need to take their character in the game's world to various quest givers to get these missions, which gave a reason for the player to explore the map.[4] From the narrative side, they placed the game prior to the formation of the Assassin's Order in Egypt as to avoid the need to have assassins drive the storyline, and made the playable character Bayek a medjay people would normally respect and seek the help of.[4] The contemporary storyline also shifted back to a single character, Layla Hassan, an Abstergo researcher. They limited the number of times the game's perspective shifts to her character compared to previous games but gave these segments more meaning, such as allowing the player to explore Layla's laptop with background information on the state of Assassins to that point.[4] Assassin's Creed Odyssey followed in a similar approach.[4]
Assassin's Creed Valhalla continues the same style as Origins and Odyssey but recognizes feedback from the prior games, adding back in the social stealth elements, as well as the concept of a customizable home base that was first introduced in Syndicate.[4]  
