Zagor is an Italian comic book created by editor and writer Sergio Bonelli (pseudonym Guido Nolitta) and artist Gallieno Ferri. Zagor was first published In Italy by Sergio Bonelli Editore in 1961.
Zagor's real name is Patrick Wilding, the son of Mike and Betty. He is a western-tarzanesque character living in a fictional forest named Darkwood, located in Pennsylvania, north eastern United States. His name Zagor comes from his Indian name "Za-Gor Te-Nay", whose fictional meaning is "The Spirit with the Hatchet". Though the writers do not mention exact dates, Zagor is supposed to be active during the first half of the 19th century, or around 1825–1830. Zagor fights to maintain peace all over his territory, protecting the Indian tribes and hunting down criminals regardless of their skin color. Son of an army official retiring to live as a pioneer and trapper in the forests of the north-east, Patrick Wilding sees his parents die at the hands of a band of Abenaki Indians, led by Salomon Kinsky. Taken in by the middle-aged trapper nicknamed "Wandering Fitzy", the boy grows up with only one thought on his mind: revenge. Fitzy teaches him how to make a deadly weapon out of a hatchet, and when he is old enough to fulfill his vengeance, Patrick goes on to track down and mercilessly slay his family's assailants. As he is about to enact his revenge on defeated Kinsky, Patrick is presented with the evidence of his father's dark past. Lieutenant Mike Wilding was a ruthless leader of the force which massacred the Abenaki community on the banks of Silver Lake, an event which saw him dishonorably discharged from the army. The attack on the Patrick's home on the shore of Clear Water river was, in fact, a rightful retribution for commander Wilding's wrongdoings. As Kinsky is about to gun down confused and distracted Patrick, Fitzy arrives in time to save the life of his protégé but, in doing so, is mortally wounded and dies in Patrick's arms. The boy's understanding of the relativity of the concepts of good, evil and justice comes in question as he is devastated with pain, grief, confusion and the genocide of his own that mirrors the one committed by Mike Wilding years ago.
To atone for his father's sins, as well as his own, Patrick is compelled to transform himself (with his accomplices the Sullivans, a family of acrobats who are his image makers) into Za-Gor-Te-Nay, shortened to Zagor. He is a kind of avenger always ready to side with the weak and the oppressed, whether red, white or black, whoever they may be. Moving his shack to an island surrounded by quick-sand in a marshy area of Darkwood Forest, Zagor begins his work as a peacemaker. He takes Darkwood tribes under his wing earning himself a distinction of the Lord of Darkwood, beloved and respected by peaceful natives and trappers, and feared and hated by anyone who would endanger the peace between reds and whites. Zagor is not a typical western character, as his stories mix horror and science fiction by side with a bit of humour coming mostly from his sidekick Chico, a short, fat Mexican man who became his best friend. His full name is "Don" Chico Felipe Cayetano Lopez Martinez y Gonzales. 
Zagor's abilities include almost superhuman strength, agility and endurance. His fighting prowess is extraordinary whether he finds himself in a gunfight or plain brawl. If needed, Zagor is more than capable of dealing with multiple opponents and is basically invincible in a one-on-one bout. In many occasions, he is also seen fighting North American wildlife (such as cougars, alligators and even bears) with nothing more than his hatchet or knife. He is infallible with his oval bladed hatchet, whether he uses it as a melee weapon or as a projectile. Zagor is also shown possessing an incredible speed that, paired with his almost cat-like reflexes, often allows him to catch a traveling spear or even an arrow, a feats which usually leave Indians in an awe further solidifying Zagor's status of an emissary of the Great Spirit (a superstition that Zagor uses to his advantage). Zagor can quickly cover great distances using his trademark branch-to-branch way of traveling where he jumps from one treetop to another. His war cry seems to be a roar of an unidentifiable (and presumably horrific) creature. This is one of Zagor's calling cards, the one which usually leaves wrongdoers in a frantic state of mind.
Throughout the series, it is strongly suggested that Zagor, although not a demi-god that he claims to be, is indeed in Manitou's good graces and on more than few occasions he has served as a champion of heavens against the forces of evil drawing his strength from the divine intervention (best example being the storyline of Hellingen's Return - episodes #275 through #280). Later stories have also hinted that Zagor's great abilities could come from him being a descendant of an Atlantean royalty or perhaps a reincarnation of an ancient African deity.
Although capable of near-superhuman feats, there were rare instances when Zagor was bested by certain extraordinary individuals. In a contest of skill (trials of power, speed, reflexes, marksmanship, breath-diving and beast-fighting) against multi-talented villain Supermike, Zagor is forced into a seventh round tie-breaker - a life-or-death duel atop of a small platform surrounded by the garden of spikes and daggers (which he, eventually, wins convincingly while even managing to spare the life of an opponent).
When it comes to a fair slugfest, there were very few foes able to hold their own against the Spirit with the Hatchet. Such is the case with the Alchemist Robert Gray. In the episodes Criminal Genius (#252) and The Rebellion of the Mohawks (#253) Zagor and Gray duke it out twice with Zagor coming on top the first time around and Gray winning the second duel. It is worth noting, though, that Gray had an advantage of his steel prosthetic hands thus forcing brutally beaten Zagor to dishonor himself by resorting to shoot the unarmed opponent. Another example of worthy adversary comes in the face of Captain Otto Kraus, commander of the special paramilitary unit called the Black Wolves (episode #32 - The Fugitive). Kraus, proficient practitioner of the unnamed oriental martial arts, although weary from hours of being chased by Zagor and the Pennacooke Indians, still manages to K.O. Zagor in a convincing fashion, just before he is, ironically, shot dead by a surviving member of his own unit for deserting the squad on the battlefield.
Even though Zagor is popular in Italy, it is even more popular in Croatia and Serbia, where it is being published to this day; his stories are also published in other former Yugoslav republics Bosnia and Herzegovina, Macedonia and Slovenia. In former Yugoslavia, Zagor was published by the Serbian publication Dnevnik in its Zlatna Serija edition from 1968. Although not as popular, Zagor comics are also published in Austria.
Zagor is one of the most popular comic heroes in Turkey since the 1960s. Two unofficial Zagor movies have been produced in Turkey in 1971, Zagor - Kara Korsan'in hazineleri and Zagor - Kara Bela.[1] Zagor was also published in Greece and in Israel in the 1970s, where, during that time, Tex Willer was published as well.
In 2015, Epicenter Comics released, in U.S.A., the first English-language edition of the three-part story Zagor! Terror from the Sea, including extra essays, introduction texts and original covers. 
